Cleanup Concepts page (#2409)
flyteorg/flyte: rsts/concepts/component_architecture/flytepropeller_architecture.rst

FlytePropeller Architecture
###########################

.. note:: 

>    In the frame of this document we use the term “workflow” to describe a single execution of a workflow definition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   In the frame of this document, we use the term “workflow” to describe the single execution of a workflow definition.
```

Introduction
============

> Flyte :ref:`workflows <divedeep-workflows>` are represented as a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) of interconnected Nodes. Flyte supports a robust collection of Node types to ensure diverse functionality. TaskNodes support a plugin system to externally add system integrations. Control flow can be altered during runtime using BranchNodes, which prune downstream evaluation paths based on input, and DynamicNodes, which add nodes to the DAG. WorkflowNodes allow embedding workflows within each other.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Flyte :ref:`workflow <divedeep-workflows>` is represented as a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) of interconnected Nodes. Flyte supports a robust collection of Node types to ensure diverse functionality.

- ``TaskNodes`` support a plugin system to externally add system integrations.
- Control flow can be altered during runtime using ``BranchNodes``, which prune downstream evaluation paths based on input. 
- ``DynamicNodes` add nodes to the DAG. 
- ``WorkflowNodes`` allow embedding workflows within each other.
```

FlytePropeller is responsible for scheduling and tracking execution of Flyte workflows. It is implemented using a K8s controller and adheres to the established K8s design principles. In this scheme, resources are periodically evaluated and the goal is to transition from the observed state to a requested state. 

> In our case, workflows are the resource and they are iteratively evaluated to transition from the current state to success. During each loop, the current workflow state is established as the phase of workflow nodes and subsequent tasks, and the FlytePropeller performs operations to transition this state to success. The operations may include scheduling (or rescheduling) node executions, evaluating dynamic or branch nodes, etc. These design decisions ensure that FlytePropeller can scale to manage a large number of concurrent workflows without performance degradation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our case, workflows are the resources and they are iteratively evaluated to transition from the current state to success. During each loop, the current workflow state is established as the phase of workflow nodes and subsequent tasks, and FlytePropeller performs operations to transition this state to success. The operations may include scheduling (or rescheduling) node executions, evaluating dynamic or branch nodes, etc. These design decisions ensure that FlytePropeller can scale to manage a large number of concurrent workflows without performance degradation.
```

Components
==========

FlyteWorkflow CRD / K8s Integration
-----------------------------------

> Workflows in Flyte are maintained as Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) in Kubernetes, which are stored in the backing etcd cluster. Each execution of a workflow definition results in the creation of a new FlyteWorkflow CRD which maintains a state for the entirety of processing. CRDs provide variable definitions to describe both resource specifications (spec) and status' (status). The FlyteWorkflow CRD uses the spec subsection to detail the workflow DAG, embodying node dependencies, etc. The status subsection tracks workflow metadata including overall workflow status, node / task phases, status / phase transition timestamps, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Workflows in Flyte are maintained as Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) in Kubernetes, which are stored in the backing etcd cluster. Each execution of a workflow definition results in the creation of a new FlyteWorkflow CRD which maintains a state for the entirety of processing. CRDs provide variable definitions to describe both resource specifications (spec) and status' (status). The FlyteWorkflow CRD uses the spec subsection to detail the workflow DAG, embodying node dependencies, etc. The status subsection tracks workflow metadata including overall workflow status, node/task phases, status/phase transition timestamps, etc.
```

> K8s exposes a powerful controller/operator API that enables entities to track creation/updates over a specific resource type. FlytePropeller uses this API to track FlyteWorkflows, meaning every time an instance of the FlyteWorkflow CRD is created/updated, the FlytePropeller instance is notified. FlyteAdmin is the common entry point, where initialization of FlyteWorkflow CRDs may be triggered by user workflow definition executions, automatic relaunches, or periodically scheduled workflow definition executions. However, it is conceivable to manually create FlyteWorkflow CRDs, but this will have limited visibility and usability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
K8s exposes a powerful controller/operator API that enables entities to track creation/updates over a specific resource type. FlytePropeller uses this API to track ``FlyteWorkflow``s, meaning every time an instance of the FlyteWorkflow CRD is created/updated, the FlytePropeller instance is notified. FlyteAdmin is the common entry point, where initialization of FlyteWorkflow CRDs may be triggered by user workflow definition executions, automatic relaunches, or periodically scheduled workflow definition executions. However, it is conceivable to manually create FlyteWorkflow CRDs, but this will have limited visibility and usability.
```

WorkQueue/WorkerPool
----------------------

FlytePropeller supports concurrent execution of multiple, unique workflows using a WorkQueue and WorkerPool.

The WorkQueue is a FIFO queue storing workflow ID strings that require a lookup to retrieve the FlyteWorkflow CRD to ensure up-to-date status. A workflow may be added to the queue in a variety of circumstances:

#. A new FlyteWorkflow CRD is created or an existing instance is updated
#. The K8s Informer resyncs the FlyteWorkflow periodically (necessary to detect workflow timeouts and ensure liveness)
#. A FlytePropeller worker experiences an error during a processing loop
#. The WorkflowExecutor observes a completed downstream node
#. A NodeHandler observes state change and explicitly enqueues its owner (For example, K8s pod informer observes completion of a task)

> The WorkerPool is implemented as a collection of Go routines, one for each worker. Using this lightweight construct, FlytePropeller can scale to 1000s of workers on a single CPU. Workers continually poll the WorkQueue for workflows. On success, the workflow is executed (passed to WorkflowExecutor).

Reviewer: ``goroutines`` is correct, so we can revert to the previous version.

WorkflowExecutor
----------------

> The WorkflowExecutor is responsible for handling high-level workflow operations. This includes maintaining the workflow phase (For example: running, failing, succeeded, etc.) according to the underlying node phases and administering pending cleanup operations. For example, aborting existing node evaluations during workflow failures or removing FlyteWorkflow CRD finalizers on completion to ensure the CRD is deleted. Additionally, at the conclusion of each evaluation round, the WorkflowExecutor updates the FlyteWorkflow CRD with updated metadata fields to track status between evaluation iterations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The WorkflowExecutor is responsible for handling high-level workflow operations. This includes maintaining the workflow phase (for example: running, failing, succeeded, etc.) according to the underlying node phases and administering pending cleanup operations. For example, aborting existing node evaluations during workflow failures or removing FlyteWorkflow CRD finalizers on completion to ensure the CRD is deleted. Additionally, at the conclusion of each evaluation round, the WorkflowExecutor updates the FlyteWorkflow CRD with updated metadata fields to track status between evaluation iterations.
```

NodeHandlers
------------

FlytePropeller includes a robust collection of NodeHandlers to support diverse evaluation of the workflow DAG:

* **TaskHandler (Plugins)**: These are responsible for executing plugin specific tasks. This may include contacting FlyteAdmin to schedule K8s pod to perform work, calling a web API to begin/track evaluation, and much more. The plugin paradigm exposes an extensible interface for adding functionality to Flyte workflows.
* **DynamicHandler**: Flyte workflow CRDs are initialized using a DAG compiled during the registration process. The numerous benefits of this approach are beyond the scope of this document. However, there are situations where the complete DAG is unknown at compile time. For example, when executing a task on each value of an input list. Using Dynamic nodes, a new DAG subgraph may be dynamically compiled during runtime and linked to the existing FlyteWorkflow CRD.

> * **WorkflowHandler**: This handler allows embedding workflows within another workflow definition. The API exposes this functionality using either (1) an inline execution, where the workflow function is invoked directly resulting in a single FlyteWorkflow CRD with an appended sub-workflow, or (2) a launch plan, which uses a TODO to create a separate sub-FlyteWorkflow CRD whose execution state is linked to the parent FlyteWorkflow CRD.

Reviewer: @SmritiSatyanV, could you ask what TODO here is?
